We need to go to
Secretary of State Blinken.
He is in Brussels.
Let's listen in
and we'll come back to that.
And I made clear then
the commitment of the United States
to Israel's security and to ensuring
that October 7th
could never happen again.
I also underscored Israel's moral,
strategic and legal requirements
to protect civilians and provide
humanitarian assistance
to those who needed it.
Now, of course,
what happened after October 7th
could have ended immediately
if Hamas had stopped hiding behind
civilians, released the hostages
and put down its weapons
But Israel is not Hamas.
Israel is a democracy.
Hamas, a terrorist organization,
and democracies
place the highest value on human life.
Every human life,
as has been said,
whoever saves the life,
saves the entire world.
That's our strength.
It's what distinguishes us
from terrorists.
Like Hamas.
If we lose that reverence for human life,
we risk becoming indistinguishable
from those we confront
Here's the current reality in Gaza.
Despite important steps
that Israel has taken
to allow assistance into Gaza.
The results on the ground
are woefully insufficient
and unacceptable.
100% of the population in Gaza
knows acute levels of food insecurity.
100% of the population
is in need of humanitarian assistance
and those working heroically
to provide that assistance are doing so
in great peril to their own lives.
This week's horrific attack
on the world's central kitchen
was not the first such incident.
It must be the last.
President Biden spoke a short
while ago with Prime Minister Netanyahu.
The leaders discussed
the situation in Gaza.
The president
emphasized that the strikes
on humanitarian workers
and the overall humanitarian situation
are unacceptable.
He made clear
the need for Israel to announce
a series of specific concrete
and measurable steps to address
civilian harm, humanitarian suffering
and the safety of aid workers.
He made clear that U.S.
policy with respect to Gaza
will be determined
by our assessment
of Israel's immediate action
on these steps.
He underscored as well
that an immediate cease fire is essential
to stabilize
and improve the humanitarian situation
and protect innocent civilians.
And he urged Prime Minister Netanyahu
to empower his negotiators
to conclude a deal
without delay to bring the hostages home.
The two leaders also discussed
public Iranian threats against Israel
and the Israeli people.
President Biden reaffirmed
the United States strong support
for Israel
in the face of these threats
and our commitment to Israel's security
Right now,
there is no higher priority in Gaza
than protecting civilians.
Surging humanitarian assistance
and ensuring the security
of those who provide it.
Israel must meet this moment.
We've been.
We discussed Secretary of State
Antony Blinken at NATO's
headquarters on the 75th
anniversary of the founding
of the organization.
He's live in Brussels, Belgium.
Some significant remarks
when it comes to the conflict in Gaza.
The secretary of state saying
that he has communicated
to Israeli officials not only the U.S.
his commitment
to Israel
and its war against Hamas,
but also the moral obligation that Israel
has to protect civilians
and aid workers in the Gaza Strip.
He specifically said,
and I quote,
If we lose reverence for human life,
we become indistinguishable
from them, from Hamas terrorists.
He described the efforts so far
by Israel since October seven to protect
civilians and humanitarian aid workers
as woefully inadequate.
And he laid out what we just got
a readout from the call
that President Biden
had with the prime minister
that the United States would consider
its approach to Israel
based on concrete steps to change
the way that Israelis handled civilians
and aid workers.
That's what
they're expecting data from Israel,
which is clear.
He said,
that they need to have concrete,
measurable steps to address harm
to civilians,
civilians suffering,
and also to aid workers.
And he said that US aid to Gaza
may be determined by those steps.
That's essentially what he said.
And this is really significant
because it comes on the heels
of a very close Biden ally.
Senator Coons,
talking this morning
about being open
to putting conditions on aid to Israel,
which is really
the first time that we have heard
the administration go so far.
And this is even as we're
hearing from a senior administration
official, that the policy hasn't changed.
The president is frustrated.
The policy hasn't changed.
This is signaling a potential
policy change.
So nonetheless, this is this is big.
Absolutely.
Notably, the timing of the the apparent
accidental strike coming
almost a day after the U.S.
announced this enormous deal.
$18 billion to sell F-15 fighter jets
to Israel.
The question now
being, is this rhetoric
that actually moves the needle or do
there have to be conditions on arms
in order
to get Prime Minister
Netanyahu and some of the other
Israeli officials
to carry out
significant change in the way
that they've been conducting the war?
We have with us
retired Colonel
Cedric Leighton
to give us some perspective.
Colonel Leighton,
from what you heard
from the secretary of state there,
it is a noticeable shift
saying that the policy toward
Israel will change, determined on
the way that
Israel conducts its operations in Gaza.
Absolutely.
And in essence,
what we're talking about,
Boris here is conditioning the aide
on Israeli conduct going forward.
I and I guess
in this case, you can kind of say
past is prolog
because the past conduct of Israeli
operations has not met U.S. standards.
And at this point in time,
it appears
as if it appears
as if the Department of Defense
and the administration
are looking
at changing the policy potentially
where they actually say, look,
you cannot use these weapons
against civilian targets,
you cannot use these weapons against
aid workers.
And that's the kind of thing
that I think might be happening here.
Whether or not it does, of course, is
is going to be borne out in the next
few days, probably.
But didn't
you mention the F-15 sale to Israel?
That's something
that's going to take place over
the next four or five years
in order
to actually get those weapons
to the Israelis.
But the other part of
this is they have already delivered,
Aaron, in the process
of delivering more £2,000 bombs
to Israel.
That's a much more immediate thing.
It's going to be interesting
to see
whether or not that delivery is stopped
before they actually are
put into Israeli airplanes
for potential use.
And that's
that's going to be a significant thing.
There are two things that the Israelis
that the U.S.
is worried about with Israel.
One of them is
the immediate conduct in Gaza.
The second thing is using Israel
as a buffer against Iran.
And that is going to be
kind of the balancing act
that the administration has to deal
with at this point.
Let's listen in to Admiral Kirby
and the overall humanitarian situation
in Gaza are unacceptable.
He made clear
the need
for Israel to announce
and to implement
a series of specific concrete
and measurable steps
to address civilian harm,
humanitarian suffering
and the safety of aid workers.
He made clear that U.S.
policy with respect to Gaza
will be determined by our assessment
of Israel's immediate action
on these steps.
He underscored that an immediate cease
fire is essential to stabilize
and improve the humanitarian situation
and to protect innocent civilians.
And he urged the prime minister
to empower his negotiators
to conclude a deal
without delay to bring the hostages home.
The two leaders also discussed
public Iranian threats against Israel
and the Israeli people.
President Biden made clear
that the United States
strongly supports Israel
in the face of those threats.
That's all I have.
Admiral,
you're not specifying what concrete steps
Israel must take.
Example, I.
I gave you some of a broad sense of it.
We want to see more crossings opened up.
We want to see more trucks getting
in, particularly from Jordan.
We want to see
tangible steps that the mitigation
of civilian harm,
particularly to humanitarian aid workers,
but obviously all civilians.
But we want to see that they have
that they have moved forward
on proper steps to de-conflict
with aid workers
as they move
around, that the information flow
is vital.
Their language we've heard for weeks
now, you're not talking about
sort of telling us
how exactly
you will measure those measurable steps
right.
What I said was
we're going to
examine our policy approaches
based on the our assessment of the way
the Israeli side
modifies their behavior,
modifies their policy and decision
making processes.
And so,
first of all, let's
see what they say they're going to do.
And then let's watch
and see
how they execute to what they say.
And I don't want to get ahead of them
on what they are
and what they
what they plan to say about the changes
they're going to make.
But we'll base
our policy decisions
based on an assessment
of how they execute
to their policy decisions.
You're not talking
about what
potential US
policy changes are on the table.
Can you say whether the president
share that with the Prime Minister
on this phone call?
The President made clear
that the that absent changes
in the protection
of civilians on the ground, absent
changes to the
volume of humanitarian assistance
getting in, absent
absent any movement on
a cease fire
that will allow hostages
to get out and more aid to get in.
Absent, you know, a calming down
that he will have
to reconsider his own policy
choices with respect to Gaza.